<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV: Flowering of the Lotus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Flowering of the Lotus</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn led the way into the library, switching on the reading-lamp upon the large table. His son stood just within the doorway, his arms folded and his chin upon his breast.</p>
			<p>The doctor sat down at the table, watching the other.</p>
			<p>Suddenly Robert spoke:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs it possible, sir, is it possible‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù his voice was barely audible‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúthat her illness can in any way be due to the orchids?‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn frowned thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat do you mean, exactly?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOrchids are mysterious things. They come from places where there are strange and dreadful diseases. Is it not possible that they may convey‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSome sort of contagion?‚Äù concluded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn. ‚ÄúIt is a point that I have seen raised, certainly. But nothing of the sort has ever been established. I have heard something, tonight, though, which‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat have you heard, sir?‚Äù asked his son eagerly, stepping forward to the table.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever mind at the moment, Rob; let me think.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He rested his elbow upon the table, and his chin in his hand. His professional instincts had told him that unless something could be done‚ÅÝ‚Äîsomething which the highest medical skill in London had thus far been unable to devise‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMyra Duquesne had but four hours to live. Somewhere in his mind a memory lurked, evasive, taunting him. This wild suggestion of his son‚Äôs, that the girl‚Äôs illness might be due in some way to her contact with the orchids, was in part responsible for this confused memory, but it seemed to be associated, too, with the story of Crombie the gardener‚ÅÝ‚Äîand with Antony Ferrara. He felt that somewhere in the darkness surrounding him there was a speck of light, if he could but turn in the right direction to see it. So, whilst Robert Cairn walked restlessly about the big room, the doctor sat with his chin resting in the palm of his hand, seeking to concentrate his mind upon that vague memory, which defied him, whilst the hand of the library clock crept from twelve towards one; whilst he knew that the faint life in Myra Duquesne was slowly ebbing away in response to some mysterious condition, utterly outside his experience.</p>
			<p>Distant clocks chimed <em>One</em>! Three hours only!</p>
			<p>Robert Cairn began to beat his fist into the palm of his left hand convulsively. Yet his father did not stir, but sat there, a black-shadowed wrinkle between his brows.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBy God!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The doctor sprang to his feet, and with feverish haste began to fumble amongst a bunch of keys.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is it, sir! What is it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The doctor unlocked the drawer of the big table, and drew out a thick manuscript written in small and exquisitely neat characters. He placed it under the lamp, and rapidly began to turn the pages.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is hope, Rob!‚Äù he said with quiet self-possession.</p>
			<p>Robert Cairn came round the table, and leant over his father‚Äôs shoulder.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSir Michael Ferrara‚Äôs writing!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHis unpublished book, Rob. We were to have completed it, together, but death claimed him, and in view of the contents, I‚ÅÝ‚Äîperhaps superstitiously‚ÅÝ‚Äîdecided to suppress it.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Ah!‚Äù</p>
			<p>He placed the point of his finger upon a carefully drawn sketch, designed to illustrate the text. It was evidently a careful copy from the Ancient Egyptian. It represented a row of priestesses, each having her hair plaited in a thick queue, standing before a priest armed with a pair of scissors. In the centre of the drawing was an altar, upon which stood vases of flowers; and upon the right ranked a row of mummies, corresponding in number with the priestesses upon the left.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBy God!‚Äù repeated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn, ‚Äúwe were both wrong, we were both wrong!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat do you mean, sir? for Heaven‚Äôs sake, what do you mean?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis drawing,‚Äù replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn, ‚Äúwas copied from the wall of a certain tomb‚ÅÝ‚Äînow reclosed. Since we knew that the tomb was that of one of the greatest wizards who ever lived in Egypt, we knew also that the inscription had some magical significance. We knew that the flowers represented here, were a species of the extinct sacred Lotus. All our researches did not avail us to discover for what purpose or by what means these flowers were cultivated. Nor could we determine the meaning of the cutting off,‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe ran his fingers over the sketch‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúof the priestesses‚Äô hair by the high priest of the goddess‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat goddess, sir?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA goddess, Rob, of which Egyptology knows nothing!‚ÅÝ‚Äîa mystical religion the existence of which has been vaguely suspected by a living French savant‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but this is no time‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn closed the manuscript, replaced it and relocked the drawer. He glanced at the clock.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA quarter past one,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúCome, Rob!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Without hesitation, his son followed him from the house. The car was waiting, and shortly they were speeding through the deserted streets, back to the house where death in a strange guise was beckoning to Myra Duquesne. As the car started‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you know,‚Äù asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn, ‚Äúif Saunderson has bought any orchids‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>quite</em> recently, I mean?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù replied his son dully; ‚Äúhe bought a small parcel only a fortnight ago.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA fortnight!‚Äù cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn excitedly‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúyou are sure of that? You mean that the purchase was made since Ferrara‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCeased to visit the house? Yes. Why!‚ÅÝ‚Äîit must have been the very day after!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn clearly was labouring under tremendous excitement.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhere did he buy these orchids?‚Äù he asked, evenly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFrom someone who came to the house‚ÅÝ‚Äîsomeone he had never dealt with before.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The doctor, his hands resting upon his knees, was rapidly drumming with his fingers.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd‚ÅÝ‚Äîdid he cultivate them?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTwo only proved successful. One is on the point of blooming‚ÅÝ‚Äîif it is not blooming already. He calls it the ‚ÄòMystery.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>At that, the doctor‚Äôs excitement overcame him. Suddenly leaning out of the window, he shouted to the chauffeur:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúQuicker! Quicker! Never mind risks. Keep on top speed!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is it, sir?‚Äù cried his son. ‚ÄúHeavens! what is it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid you say that it might have bloomed, Rob?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMyra‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚ÄîRobert Cairn swallowed noisily‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äútold me three days ago that it was expected to bloom before the end of the week.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is it like?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA thing four feet high, with huge egg-shaped buds.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMerciful God grant that we are in time,‚Äù whispered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn. ‚ÄúI could believe once more in the justice of Heaven, if the great knowledge of Sir Michael Ferrara should prove to be the weapon to destroy the fiend whom we raised!‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe and I‚ÅÝ‚Äîmay we be forgiven!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Robert Cairn‚Äôs excitement was dreadful.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCan you tell me nothing?‚Äù he cried. ‚ÄúWhat do you hope? What do you fear?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt ask me, Rob,‚Äù replied his father; ‚Äúyou will know within five minutes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The car indeed was leaping along the dark suburban roads at a speed little below that of an express train. Corners the chauffeur negotiated in racing fashion, so that at times two wheels thrashed the empty air; and once or twice the big car swung round as upon a pivot only to recover again in response to the skilled tactics of the driver.</p>
			<p>They roared down the sloping narrow lane to the gate of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSaunderson‚Äôs house with a noise like the coming of a great storm, and were nearly hurled from their seats when the brakes were applied, and the car brought to a standstill.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn leapt out, pushed open the gate and ran up to the house, his son closely following. There was a light in the hall and Miss Saunderson who had expected them, and had heard their stormy approach, already held the door open. In the hall‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWait here one moment,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn.</p>
			<p>Ignoring Saunderson, who had come out from the library, he ran upstairs. A minute later, his face very pale, he came running down again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe is worse?‚Äù began Saunderson, ‚Äúbut‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGive me the key of the orchid-house!‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn tersely.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOrchid-house!‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt hesitate. Don‚Äôt waste a second. Give me the key.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Saunderson‚Äôs expression showed that he thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn to be mad, but nevertheless he plunged his hand into his pocket and pulled out a key-ring. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn snatched it in a flash.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhich key?‚Äù he snapped.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Chubb, but‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFollow me, Rob!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Down the hall he raced, his son beside him, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSaunderson following more slowly. Out into the garden he went and over the lawn towards the shrubbery.</p>
			<p>The orchid-houses lay in dense shadow; but the doctor almost threw himself against the door.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúStrike a match!‚Äù he panted. Then‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNever mind‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI have it!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The door flew open with a bang. A sickly perfume swept out to them.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMatches! matches, Rob! this way!‚Äù</p>
			<p>They went stumbling in. Robert Cairn took out a box of matches‚ÅÝ‚Äîand struck one. His father was further along, in the centre building.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour knife, boy‚ÅÝ‚Äîquick! <em>quick!</em>‚Äù</p>
			<p>As the dim light crept along the aisle between the orchids, Robert Cairn saw his father‚Äôs horror-stricken face‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and saw a vivid green plant growing in a sort of tub, before which the doctor stood. Four huge, smooth, egg-shaped buds grew upon the leafless stems; two of them were on the point of opening, and one already showed a delicious, rosy flush about its apex.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn grasped the knife which Robert tremblingly offered him. The match went out. There was a sound of hacking, a soft <em>swishing</em>, and a dull thud upon the tiled floor.</p>
			<p>As another match fluttered into brief life, the mysterious orchid, severed just above the soil, fell from the tub. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn stamped the swelling buds under his feet. A profusion of colourless sap was pouring out upon the floor.</p>
			<p>Above the intoxicating odour of the place, a smell like that of blood made itself perceptible.</p>
			<p>The second match went out.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnother‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn‚Äôs voice rose barely above a whisper. With fingers quivering, Robert Cairn managed to light a third match. His father, from a second tub, tore out a smaller plant and ground its soft tentacles beneath his feet. The place smelt like an operating theatre. The doctor swayed dizzily as the third match became extinguished, clutching at his son for support.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHer life was in it, boy!‚Äù he whispered. ‚ÄúShe would have died in the hour that it bloomed! The priestesses‚ÅÝ‚Äîwere consecrated to this.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Let me get into the air‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSaunderson, silent with amazement, met them.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt speak,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn to him. ‚ÄúLook at the dead stems of your ‚ÄòMystery.‚Äô You will find a thread of bright hair in the heart of each!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<hr/>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝCairn opened the door of the sickroom and beckoned to his son, who, haggard, trembling, waited upon the landing.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome in, boy,‚Äù he said softly‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúand thank God!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Robert Cairn, on tiptoe, entered. Myra Duquesne, pathetically pale but with that dreadful, ominous shadow gone from her face, turned her wistful eyes towards the door; and their wistfulness became gladness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRob!‚Äù she sighed‚ÅÝ‚Äîand stretched out her arms.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
